Brett, Carol, Paul, Barry, welcome to all of you to Talk Python To Me.
So happy to have you back.
Hi, Michael.
Thanks.
It's great to see you.
I will tell you what, if the backstage pre-show is any indication of how much fun we're going to be having here, it's going to be a good
time.
I
hope everyone here is ready for some fun stories, some fun history, and some unexpected things out there.
And as I was doing this research, I see lots of your names popping up in these places.
Oh, there were 30 people doing Python.
And Barry and Paul happened to be there, like in the world sort of thing.
Maybe at the conference.
But pretty early days, I think.
And so I'm very excited.
to talk about just these stories, history of Python, inspired somewhat by the upcoming documentary from Cult Repo, I believe it is, that's putting it together.
What a fun, fun thing.
There was an April Fool's joke that people may have seen, but there's also a serious documentary coming, right?
Yes.
There's a trailer.
There was a trailer shown at PyCon just recently.
It was really good, too.
It's got
a good reception.
The people actually showed up at 8.30 in the morning, which doesn't happen a lot at Bycon.
I'll tell you what, that's my kind of stuff.
People say, what's your favorite movie, Michael?
I'm like, hmm, how am I going to answer this one?
How about I watch programming and other types of documentaries on YouTube?
Is that kind of like, no, I don't want to talk to you anymore about this.
It's going to be so good.
Is that how you extract yourself out of a conversation you want to
be a part of at parties now, Michael?
I'm just like, let me tell you about this whole documentary.
What do I do for fun?
Oh, I watch programming documentaries on YouTube.
In fact, you're invited to leave.
What
is it?
Four o'clock.
Shut this down.
Exactly.
I imagine, though, the podcast listeners will be much more in line with, you know, being in the group that would care to pay attention to that.
So let's just do a super quick round of introductions.
I know most people know you because, as I said, you all have been doing this for a super long time.
But for those who are new listeners, we have many, many new listeners all the time, people getting into Python.
Biggest group, as we learned from the survey, which is very interesting.
So maybe we'll go around the Brady Bunch squares.
Brett, you go first.
My name is Brett Cannon.
I am the person Paul Everett is chasing to become the second most frequent guest on this podcast.
I've been a Python core developer since April of 2003.
I've been using Python since fall of 2000.
I feel very lucky to be part of this deceitful group of people.
Yeah, I think that's the good quick summary.
And I know if you scroll up, Anthony Shaw beats me.
Oh, and Brian actually
beats me.
There's no scrolling.
I don't count Brian.
He's an insider.
So, yeah, you
all are,
I mean, you're leading.
But now we have you two on here at the same time.
So it's just going to asymptotically.
Like the limit at infinity will be the same.
But right now.
That's fine.
Yeah.
I think that's fair.
That's fair to me.
Yeah.
It's been a little while since we had you on the show, Brett.
Awesome to have you back.
Yes.
Thanks.
Lock files took a bit longer than I expected.
Carol.
Hello.
Hi.
I'm Carol Willing.
Brett, your lock files got lots of love at PyCon, just so you know.
I
am the baby of this
group.
I started using PyCon in 2012.
And 2017 became a core developer and had some fun on the steering council with some of these cool folks.
And so these days I spend a third of my time working and often in the open science, data science space with open source projects there, sit on some boards, do some angel investing.
the other happy third is I donate a whole lot of time not just to open source but actually to mentoring individuals one-on-one in who are trying to get more involved in open source or learn things and that is probably my biggest joy in life and then the third of my Python-y kind of life is being able to dig deep and to whatever projects rock my world and get a little time, hopefully, to play with some open hardware, blinky, wearable electronics stuff.
So I just love Python.
I love the community.
And whatever the other third, Paul is going to share with us later.
Paul has many thirds, many thirds.
I didn't realize, Carol, our Python age is almost the same, exactly.
Oh, good. Well,
you can join me
in the toddlerdom of Python.
Yeah,
exactly. We'll have to stay home while the grown-ups like Paul go out who've been at this for a little while.
Paul, what, five years now, is it?
Five in dog years? That's not
even in there.
You've got to make a log scale.
Yeah, Carol's right. There is another third. The bonus third of this episode will be a discussion of Sphinx talk trees, their
implementation.
And it kind of ends in like a biker horror movie mashup.
So stay tuned.
Hi, I'm Paul.
Barry and I met in 1994 at a workshop on this irrelevant, no chance to succeed project called Python.
Fun fact, just before that, I was a Navy officer.
I had the white uniform.
I was wearing the white uniform when I started Python.
That's cool.
That's pretty cool.
I run developer advocacy at JetBrains, and I get to spend my Friday with the four people that I just love the most.
This is so cool being with you.
This trailer
and
the documentary has just reminded me of
all the
joy that we get to be a part of and we get to give.
And so this is just really joyful.
Yeah.
Well, it is always awesome to have you here, Paul.
Thanks for that.
Great to be here.
With you, Barry.
Hello, hello.
Hey, good to see everyone, of course.
Saw some of you at PyCon just recently.
Barry Warsaw, yeah.
Paul and I met a long, long time ago.
Worked together for a while.
And, you know, I was very lucky because I had worked at NIST in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
sort of my first gig, actually high school, college, and then my first gig coming out of college.
And so I knew people at NIST. And I had actually seen mention of Python before that, because I was a Usenet, if anybody remembers, all the gray hairs will remember
Usenet.
And CompLangPython came up, and I was like, oh, cool. I was into languages, checked it out. And it was all Monty Python jokes, Which, you know, was awesome because, like, I loved Monty Python.
But I was like, why is this in comp lang?
You know, what does it have to do with computer programming languages?
And sort of ignored it for a little while and then got an email from a friend of ours, Mike McClay, and Ken Mannheimer, who I think were still there at NIST.
And I knew them from my time there.
And so we went up for the workshop and met Guido and a bunch of other people who were like, yeah, okay, this is kind of a fun little hobby thing, you know.
And then we decided we were going to try to take over the world.
And, you know, 30 years later, I guess we have.
Well, in some actual real literal senses, I would say, you know, the number one programming language in a lot of ways and the number one language for AI, which is trying to take over the world in its own right.
So actually
I was at the European Space Museum in the Netherlands and I saw the Mars rover and we're not taking over just this world, baby.
That's right.
Flask flies.
Well, no, we're actually on
the rover.
That's what I mean.
It's
not just the flight plan.
Yeah, the flask cap for planning the helicopter. I can't remember the name of it.
You can go to GitHub and get the code.
Yeah,
Python
was actually used to process the video on the landing of the latest Mars rover.
That is so cool.
Yeah.
It's come a long way since.
I mean, it's pretty
mind blowing because like, you know, you know, the story I tell is that we had people at that first workshop who explicitly said, you cannot tell people that we're here and that we're using Python because it's our competitive advantage.
And,
you know, I mean, that was like, that was amazing that, you know, here we are, you know, fans of the language and just really just loved the way it kind of expressed our thoughts in a very uh direct manner and yet we couldn't tell people you know who was there because um because of that that that fact but you know that's not that's not true today you know everybody uses python so
but but that actually lasted a long time like i remember uh when i was at jupiter con Do you remember when that was in New York?
Was that 2016?
I think 2017, 18, 19.
Depending on which one.
The one I gave a little keynote at.
I think that was 2017.
I was there and work had me go talk to a bank.
But I can't name the bank because they viewed Python as a competitive advantage
still.
It's still...
of Python, a recent development that everyone can just say they use Python because it's no longer a competitive advantage because it's literally everyone's advantage. So it kind of washes out.
Yeah, it lasted for a long time as that.
Yeah, totally.
And now it's like
you could
name 20 banks in New York that use Python as their competitive advantage.
All in different
ways.
And it's not a secret anymore either, right? Like Capital
One being
that big sponsor at PyCon
News every year.
It's just like, yeah.
I remember when that started. I came from being in Europe for a few years and went to my first PyCon.
And I saw this big booth with Capital One on top and I'm like, what the absolute bleep?
Capital One is
here and these consulting firms are here.
What happened to you, Python?
What's in your compiler?
That's good.
Thank
you.
Or should it be Jen?
I mean,
Jen is really where it's at these days.
They actually were sponsors of Talk Python.
I'm like,
I don't really, I mean, as much fun as that was to say, I don't really want to just advertise credit cards.
I want stuff that's relevant to listeners.
And they're like, no, no, no.
We want to advertise for our
data science team.
I'm like, okay,
that's really cool, yeah.
Yeah,
Richmond,
Virginia.
They got a big team.
Yeah.
Just for the international audience who's not from North America, Capital One has a very famous tagline in their ads that says, what's in your wallet?
Hence the
Wessner compiler line.
And they say kind of in that gruff way.
Yeah, exactly.
As gruff as I can.
Vikings
and all sorts of different ways of pitching that line.
Yeah.
Speaking of pop culture, one thing I wanted to talk about in this sort of history, anything that you see, and Barry, you touched on this.
I'm going to put the holy hand grenade scene with the killer rabbit up here just to look at, which is such an amazing thing.
But if you look at all the logos and slogans and all this kind of stuff, it's all about snakes, right?
snake icons, snake logos.
But the original motivation for the language is actually Monty Python, not ball pythons, right?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, and I remember...
In fact,
are you going to talk about the first book, the O'Reilly book?
Yep.
Go ahead.
I remember when the O'Reilly book was about to be published, and I think we saw an early copy of it or something like that, And O'Reilly, obviously, because they were animal themes, they wanted to put a snake on the front.
I remember distinctly, maybe misremember, everything I say could be totally misremembered, but I remember Guido saying, I don't want a snake on the front of it, because people have a version of snakes.
And I mean, anyway, so.
Yeah, no, I have a similar recollection of, yeah, I mean, at least at the PyCon US in 2003 was, yeah, I remember that comic going around too.
Because Learning Python's got the little mouse on it.
But yeah, Program Python has this.
Michael,
if I give you a search for the worst book cover, Internet Programming with Python.
And so Guido joined
with, oh,
Aaron, what's his name?
Yeah, there we go, right there.
so zoom in a little it's a
snake
around a can of spam with glasses with Guido's glasses on it
and our graphic
designer at Digital Creations at the time came up with this amazing
and
I'm
not sure if I'm proud of this story or not I think this story that's a fine looking snake although it does
bear a resemblance to a more frequently used emoji these days honestly but you
can imagine her face when i said okay what i want is a snake around a can of spam with with european glasses and she was she she she did it
so i have a question for the old timers in the group when did it become two snakes
oh you mean the
current that
was that was the redesign it was the redesign and I
think Guido's brother was involved
wasn't he?
wasn't that I can't remember his first name
something
Rankin
used
I
mean it's used but I don't think
was used
involved
in the redesign because I was actually part of the back when we called them webmasters the web team for python.org when
the
redesign was done because that was also
when we did
the back end, right?
Because that was the whole, we want to keep all the files
static.
There's always an episode, isn't there, Michael?
There
you go.
Right, that was one
of the requirements Oz had, actually, because he was the big driver of the website back then.
It's like, I don't want to have a CMS-back thing.
He wanted old files and was all literally with make files to generate it.
But yeah, I can't, I think that's literally just, They hired a graphic designer who also redid the back end at the same time.
And they went with it.
Because, I
mean, if you go
back to that logo, I mean, that was back when there was a little pixelated snake as the icon.
I think Windows was there.
So we were already kind of going with it at that point.
Nice.
What year was that around?
Long ago.
This is all
long ago.
That would be like the rise of the Pycons.
So PSF was 2001.
PyCon was 2003.
So it was probably around that time of
PyCon.
Yeah.
Probably the knots.
I think it was
sometime in the
knots, maybe.
By the way, I'm always scared about the documentary about being wrong on so many dates.
Yes, I can imagine.
Really?
Because everything is related in my head to PyCon and where they physically were held.
And this
is why if you watch the documentary, the opener is me asking Google, when was PyCon held in Montreal?
Because that's like when I know I did something.
And it said 2015.
And I go like, what
the hell?
And 2014.
Well, that was the deal.
That's why I
went, what?
Because I realized that we started on even numbers at that point after we did the first three years in D.C.
And we went to two years after that.
And I was like, what?
Anyway, I'm just waiting to find out multiple times in the documentary.
I said the year wrong because I got the date wrong.
So when it was, I know exactly which bike on it, what location, but I got the year wrong for when it was in that location.
All right.
So you're a quick one of attendees.
There's a lightning talk opportunity.
Find all the errors that Brent had and make it into a lightning talk.
If it just gets cut
from the documentary entirely, it was
just
too much work
to correct it.
You know what?
Yeah, there's too many asterisks in what Brent just said to throw up on.
We used up all the letters on corrections.
We
can't do it.
Find all of Brett's errors so you won't look at ours, you know.
There
you go.
No, I think you guys were awesome.
At least the trailer and the April 1st sort of thing.
That was really great.
So here, I want to throw this out here, and you all tell me about the history of it because I know it gets used all the time, and I think it might be close to home.
I came for the language, stayed for the community.
Hmm.
Any?
Brett?
Yeah, so that, I mean, that's probably why I was asking Google when Montreal was.
Because, yeah, that was 2014, as Carol just made sure I remembered correctly.
In Montreal, Diana Clark was the chair that year of PyCon.
And she basically had a little bit of stage fright and just asked if, as a fellow Canadian, if I was willing to do the opening address.
And I said, sure.
I mean, you're just going to read slides.
It's no big deal.
And I was like, yeah, sure, sure.
But I realized how much time they gave me.
And I also realized how fast I talk.
Because Thomas Wooders every year almost reminds
me how fast I talk during my presentations.
And
I knew I was going to have some extra time at the end.
And I was like, I'm going to say some stuff.
I don't know what I'm going to say.
I'm going to say some stuff.
Because it's like, how often do you get to, I mean, at that point, I hadn't given a keynote at PyCon.
So I was like, okay, cool.
This is going to be like the largest stage I'm probably ever going to have.
So I'm going to take advantage.
So I did the opening and got through it.
I had like, I can't remember, five or ten minutes to kill.
And so I just started talking.
And as I was talking, that line came out of my mouth just to try to, yeah, thank goodness.
to try to just express how I felt about the community as
my way of kind of just saying thank you to the audience because I also wanted to portray personal appreciation for what everyone had come represent to me and what hopefully the whole room represented to each other was
the
room is what makes Python and Python in general, not just
little piece of technology full of bits that we ship around the world and to Mars.
so yeah so that's all
that that's awesome yeah just visit PyCon once and you realize
how much humanity and how
much people care and how much just you know it's different
Barbara and Katie I think Katie was involved organized a workshop for kids and Barry's kid and my kid were there
oh my goodness
yeah
that's
right
that's right
that's great You know, I think about that, you know, that community thing.
It's really unique.
And I think it comes from, you know, Guido, right?
Like, you know, he brings this humanity to a cold technology, so to speak.
But it's something I have felt, and I'm sure Paul has felt that since the first day, you know.
That first workshop, it just felt like, hey, we're just hanging out and talking about computers and programming and stuff like that.
I have my best friends still today, certainly in technology, have been from the Python community.
It's
always been there.
Yeah, I think
it's definitely driven by Guido.
I mean, I have a very distinct memory from PyCon in Cleveland.
I've seen Guido get down on his knees to talk to a 12-year-old saying, hey, what have you been working on?
You want to show me?
Like, oh, that's so cool.
I mean, it's the creative of the language, and he's just getting down to some little 12-year-old and
just doing something.
It just wants to just connect with that kid and just have that conversation and just have that little one-on-one time and just, oh, yeah, just show this grown-up what you've done and just show off and be cool and all that.
I think that really has Guido's approach to all this has really led to all this because I think Guido's approach made people similar to him, Paul and Barry and all of us on this call, gravitate towards this community and this language because of it.
And it just becomes a bit effectively self-sustaining, right?
Because
people
who are not into this leave, right?
They just don't like it.
It doesn't match their view.
And either they stay and stay quiet or they get vocal and leave because it just doesn't work the way they want it to work.
And that's totally fine.
Like, I'm not no shade to anyone who's just not into the way the community functions.
But I think it just becomes a center of gravity here to just bring more and more people who think and operate this way.
And it becomes a thing.
And I think we've luckily hit a critical point here where we're able to self-sustain this kind of feeling.
Because we have gotten large enough, but we also put in the effort because the people who get drawn in are to try to keep it feeling small and somewhat intimate and just this wonderful community we have.
So I think it's lovely that it's ended up turning out this way.
And I think, you know, I've done some keynotes about Python and learning, and I think it was baked into the language at the start, like, you know, the influence that ABC had and the, in particular, how readable the language is and the intention that, hey, you write code once, but you maintain it for a long time after.
And I think, you know, the language itself on some level is much more welcoming than a lot of programming languages.
And I think, you know, that coupled with the strength of the community and the education focus of the community, like, you know, you were saying the kids workshops and stuff at PyCon, it's pretty cool.
And it makes it more inclusive by design.
On that point, Carol, I was reading, Michael put together show notes for us, and it reminded me of you winning the Frank Willison Award. Richly deserved, and a wonderful guy he was. And so I was doing some reading on that, and I came across an interview with Jessi McKellar, and she was talking about her phase, which we might get to a little bit later, and that Guido showed up in 2015 on stage with Python is for Girls, a t-shirt saying Python is for Girls.
And he's done things like that repeatedly, like the call for a CPython core contributor.
And, you know, you lead from the front.
And the outcome is predictable when you see the origin.
Yeah.
I mean, I remember the first conversation I had when I went with Guido was actually he was on stage.
And I was like, will you sprint with PyLadies?
After Selena Dekelman kind of said, you need to tell people that I was actually at the language summit.
I just had to leave early because my baby needed to be picked up from childcare.
And I'm like, okay, this is exactly what I want to do.
Like, tell the creator of Python, oops, you made a mistake.
And, oh, by the way, will you sprint with PyLadies?
And he
had that nice pause.
And then he was like, yes, I will.
And then I promptly went to the bathroom, was in tears, had a talk like the next talk schedule.
And Brett, do you mind if I tell the story?
No, no, no.
Okay.
So a few of the core developers came because I was giving a talk about how to contribute to core development, but not being a core developer.
And after all of that happened, I was so nervous.
So Brett was on stage wishing me well. And I'm like, can you just stand up here for a while just till it gets going? And then like the nerves were getting higher and higher. And I was like, will you hold my hand? And he said yes. And he's like, how long do you want me to stay up here? I said, well, about five slides in. I have this young man who was my son in a bathrobe playing trombone.
If I give you the thumbs up, you can sit down.
If not, please stay.
And fortunately, I was able to do the thumbs up.
But I wouldn't have gotten to that place had it not been for Brett's kindness and support.
And it's something that, you know, it shows, A, who Brett is.
But, you know, there have been many, many things where people have given selflessly in different ways to so many different people.
That's a lovely story.
That's what I love about Python.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that also shows, I mean, thank you for the kind words.
I will say, I mean, I did that because, I mean, it's hard to talk in front of an audience.
And I learned that through my talks at PyCon.
And I think that also shows through the way conferences typically handle first-time speakers too, right?
Like all the effort that goes in to try to have like open office hours and tutorials and letting people come in and putting an emphasis to let first-time speakers come and do all that stuff.
I think that also is a good showing of how the community, once again, really does try to lead based on how we set ourselves moving forward of trying to be welcoming and open and just a great place.
I will also say, though, I think the humor of the language also has really helped.
I think the Fluffle could probably speak well to that.
we're going to have a performance we're going to have a performance that remixes
some awesome humor and some humor and it's really good actually before we get to
that though I want to focus on a different story which I just delighted me to no end and that's when I first got into Python and that's you can open up the REPL or I guess you could write it in a Python file but I'm not sure why you would do it but you can type import anti-gravity and I heard about import this. What is this anti-gravity? So first of all, there's this XKCD joke comic that said, there's a person flying and says, how are you flying? Python. I learned it last night. Everything's so
simple.
Hello world is just print. Hello world. I know. I don't know. Dynamic typing, white space. Come join us. The programming is fun again. It's a whole new world. But how are you flying? I just typed import anti-gravity. I think it's the Python, right? Well, there's the comic and then there's, well, actually, let's just add that as a feature to the language, right?
Amazing.
Imagine getting that into Java.
Oracle would never have it.
But I
think fun
is...
Go ahead, Brett.
I was going to say, now if we could just make that to be the most popular Python XKCD comic again and not the one about environment management.
I don't even know what you're talking about.
We won't speak of it.
Thank you.
I have plans.
You know, it's funny because fun is such a big part of programming.
I think that gets under-recognized in play.
And
I've been programming since I was a fifth grader growing up in the shadow of Bell Labs on a mainframe.
And got to program on some of the first Apple computers, which was absolutely mind-blowing because it was all this exploration.
And Luciano Romolo, he and I have had lots of conversations on this.
But Python, you know, fast forward many, many years till 2012, because that was probably 1977 or so when I was using the Apple.
Python gave me that same fun and exploration.
And I'm like, this is so cool.
And it's a joy to program in.
And I had done C, C++, and I love C.
C++, not so much.
and Java and other languages list.
But Python was the one that was like, this just gets out of my way and lets me create.
And I think that's fun at whatever level you are as a developer.
Yes.
Yeah.
I think
that
also translates
to...
Go ahead, Barry.
I was just going to say that translates to the development of the language itself.
and the fact that you can and this comes back to the whole community thing as well you can't have a language that is not only vibrant for 30 years but in some ways at its peak 30 years after its inception and will probably be so for another 10 or 15, 20 years because it's so welcoming to bring people into the development of the language itself and You can choose how to be involved in Python and move it forward.
It's not some faceless committee that is pushing Python forward.
It's just people like everybody else who have their own itch, want to have some fun and dive in.
And that was something that Guido was always very adamant about is that the implementation was very approachable, just like the language, just like the community.
So it's what keeps it alive for everybody.
I'll give a case of point from
I'll give a case of point
from a couple of hours ago involving Barry some interpreters which have
taken the most
circuitous path in history
possibly
and Barry gets to announce the proclamation a couple of hours ago
I
don't
know if you've
heard but when the steering council comes out with an acceptance it's all me and when it's a rejection that's somebody else, you know, so it's like, I only do the final night.
I'm kidding, but it's kind of fun.
Go ahead, Brett.
Yeah, I just think,
I think, yeah, I was just thinking about back to Carol's comment about how she got to work on the early Apples, and like, I got started on Apple IIs and Apple Basic, and I remember Windows 3.1 shipping with QBasic in, and like having the Gorillaz game shipping, and oh, I can play with the gravity constant and make the bananas do crazy stuff, right?
And I think we were fairly lucky, as Barry says, like the language is old, but it's hitting its prime, you could argue now,
or it's perpetually
always hitting more of its prime as time goes on.
But I think we also were very lucky in terms of timing because I think language had a certain level of maturity when the internet hit its maturity, right?
And because it was also one of these languages that's easy to pick up and get going with, we were at the right place at the right time for when, oh yeah, programming, you can get into it.
And kids and other people just wanted to start trying out this whole programming thing.
And it wasn't just that weird corner of the bookstore that had like five books about programming at the time.
And so I think we just really lucked out with the timing here where it's like, oh yeah, you want to learn programming?
Yeah, there's this thing called Python, go install it.
It's got its own little editor and blah, blah, blah.
before downloading an editor wasn't just called Borland or whatever.
And so I think, yeah, the timing just was perfect for us to land right when we did and have the maturity level that we did in order to be useful to people but so easily accessible and to carry us forward to where we are now where it's like you still have a plethora of options.
You can download a bunch of different editors whether it's PyCharm or what have you.
you can get what you need, but the point is the language is still there and still available, and I think it's allowed us to continue to be very accessible to people, and that's, I think, also played into this.
Hey, I have a theory of the case.
Michael, do you have something you want to go with first?
No, you go first, and then I've got a thought.
All right, cool. I have a theory of the case that features the three of you.
How convenient.
So, I divide Python into three-thirds, and as I was joking backstage, Python has many thirds.
Brett says we'll get to nine thirds.
The first third was like Guido opens a file.
I'm curious, was it Emacs?
Did Guido open YOLO.C in
Emacs?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, he
was an Emacs user.
Guido opens a file, and then I'll say the first third for me ends, we'll say 2002.
Why?
Dot-com bubble bursts.
and so it's kind of the end of an era and it is the beginning of the PSF which started in 2001 and the end of that episode we'll refer to as the Python software activity and for me it's also personal it's when I left my company and moved to Europe now the next third, the first third is interesting because that's Barry was there at the beginning of the first third.
Second third is the rise of the PSF gave the ability to have the rise of PyCon.
And PyCon became this engine of change and growth and money.
And I'd say the end of the second third, I'll put it at 2012, 2013, and it finishes with the rise of diversity.
And I was reading up about Jesse McKellar and the years that that all went down.
And it went from 1% speakers to 3% speakers to 10% speakers to 38% of the speakers were women.
And she was a director 2012 to 2014.
And Carol was a director in that time frame.
And I think from history, she got you kind of hooked into the world of Python organizing.
She absolutely
did.
We were both volunteering on a project, which was a nonprofit called OpenHatch.
Right.
That helped people
make their first contributions to open source before there were guides on GitHub or anything
else.
And, you know, what I think people don't see with that rise is the amount of effort Jessica put in behind the scenes.
Because there
were a few of us one year when she was really busy that we kind of filled the gap for her.
But she
sent hundreds and hundreds of personal emails out to many, many people across the ecosystem.
Have you thought about talking about
doing
a poster, doing a lightning
talk, doing a
blah, blah, blah.
We'll help coach you.
And some of it happened on the PyLadies Slack.
Some of it happened on IRC with OpenHatch.
And it was very intentional.
And I think the thing she did was she measured the impact that she was trying to make.
And I think that really, I think it gave that momentum.
So I
blame her for anything that I have done in Python because that's where I learned
Django.
But I've conveniently chosen the second, third to kick off with Brett.
So around 2002, 2003 was when you started entering the scene and you
got
involved
in the PSF.
And I'd say that the finishing with the diversity in that third, it wasn't just gender diversity.
Python became a globally diverse outfit with things like PyLadies Drive and stuff like that.
And then that became the engine for the third third, which was data science and then AI.
Before we
go into
your
third third, I think the second third also, it should be pointed out, the diversity technically as well.
Because Jake Vander Plaats gave a great Python as a Mosaic keynote.
Let's get that in the show notes.
Yeah, people are coming from all different places, you know, data science.
Also, it brought in a bunch of scientists
and just,
you know, programmer curious people.
You wouldn't get that at like a C++ conference,
you know.
And I think that happened as part of the 2012 revolution and stuff.
So
if we say 2013, 2014, 2015 is the start of the next third and the start of data science, and then Jupyter
arrives on
the scene as this great democratizing force, Carol becomes PSF board director, and then things just really take off from there.
And it kind of needed the diversity from the second third to be the engine to bring in this group of people called data scientists who didn't think they were programmers.
So it's an entire new class of Python community.
Hey, what do you think?
Did the three of you buy my thirds?
Yeah.
I'm curious what the
next third is going to be.
Yeah.
What's the fourth third going to be there, Paul?
You know, in reading about Jessica, she got into Python because it twisted.
And it just turns out Glyph wrote a blog post today AI.
And so AI
and Python
are interesting
and contradictory, complimentary frenemy. I don't know. You call it.
Too early.
Too early. I think
it's one of those things. I've seen lots of paradigm shifts in tech.
And I talked about
this when I keynoted Europe Python, but I think AI is here to stay. Now,
granted,
AI was also here when I was in grad school in 1988. So, you know, but we never had the compute power that we have today. So I think I'm sort of in the camp of there's bad and there's good. And what we're, which is the same thing when the internet sort of, and the web sort of started, there was those feelings of bad and good. And over time, you kind of settle into, okay, what are these innovative ways we can use it that don't cause harm?
And, you know,
how do people benefit? Because I think it is a pretty good brainstorming partner. Would I want to give it all of my security credentials and say, go deploy this application for me? No, not
today. Maybe
not ever.
But I think there's going to be exciting stuff to come out of it. I think it's going to be that tension between, hey, this is great, or, oh, what about maybe not so much. And that will finally propel us forward to better things. So stay tuned for the
next third. Totally. And people forget, or they maybe never knew, there was a time in the internet where people would not put their credit card on to buy stuff because they were freaked out about it and now i can hardly find stuff at a store i have to buy it on online because it's the only place it exists anymore and there was super bowl ads with just weird dot coms just burning money just with no business model whatsoever like unlike even unlike today. It was just completely crazy.
Monkeys dancing.
I read today Pets.com did their IPO and went out of business nine months later.
Yep.
I remember when Java had Super Bowl ads.
Oh, wow.
I think IBM did one.
Of course
it would be IBM.
Yep.
I very distinctly remember they had an ad where they had a big sphere in the middle of a conference room table with a dot and dot com.
It's like somehow like activated and like blew all the people back in their chairs from the table. It was a wild time.
Michael, you got muted somehow.
Can you hear me?
Now we can hear you.
My computer is completely locked up but I'm just going to keep going for now.
I'll find a way to get back into it.
Completely
restarted is probably not a great idea right now.
Speaking of
locked
up, I wonder what's going to happen
with all these LLMs when you tell them to generate Python code that runs in free threads.
Yes. Oh, this is
not a history.
This is the future. The last three words
of every prompt.
It's going to be interesting. I think that's the crazy thing about all this. It's not only is Python being used to help derive this AI stuff, but the AI is also being used to generate Python code and actually it's a benchmark now for these things, which also plays into the whole, how does Python keep going forward and keep reaching its prime?
Will you have the new tech actually literally make it for you now?
But yeah, it's going to be interesting, and I think this is going to be a good example of how this tech is going to keep up, but we also don't need to go down the AI rabbit hole.
The thing that makes me confident and excited and exhilarated It is the stuff Carol's doing and Sarah Boyce and other people where in order to stay healthy, Python's a hundred year project at this point.
Python's going to be around for a long damn time.
And so you need the next generation and the generation after that.
And Barry and I mean, there are multiple generations of heroes after us represented in this call.
And then Carol's help raising the next generation.
I meet some of these people at PyCon.
Obviously Dawn, but then meeting
Velda
and Abigail and some of these other people.
And my goodness, you can just see, wow, there's some energy here.
You know, I think it all goes back to the start and things propagate out.
And I think Python, much like a network or a web, you know, has really exploded in all different directions.
And, you know, I think some of the work that Barry has been doing with packaging, I have a lot of strong feelings that that's going to make it propagate out even more.
So.
Well, I think and apologies because my network decided to do was going to be super flaky.
So I've missed a bunch of the conversation.
But what I think is super important is that those new generations, those younger generations that are coming into Python are going to make Python part of their vision.
What Python is today, what myself and Brad and Paul, our generation made Python to solve the problems that we had and to be part of our vision.
And if nothing else is true, five years from now, two years from now, Python will be something else.
And there will be other people coming in making Python what they envision it to be.
And I think that's actually what keeps it alive and keeps it vibrant.
Like you said, Paul, it's a 100-year project.
And, you know, regeneration is going to come into Python and say, and it's always been that way.
It's always been a grassroots thing.
Like you think about like async, right?
First, we just needed yield.
And then we needed sort of, you know, co-routines.
And then those became async.
And so like that didn't come from the top.
It didn't come from somebody who sort of said, I see what Python is today.
And we could just do this little thing and move it in that direction.
And it would be really cool.
And that's what keeps it alive.
So I'm super
excited to
see what, you know, the next generation.
Yeah, go ahead.
I'm as well.
And I think those kinds of things you're pointing out, Barry, I think it's the choice of do I give up on working here in this community, in this language, and go to another technology because I need something else somewhere else?
Or do I somehow add it to Python so that I can stay here and keep building with this language, right?
And I think that's really nice.
Keeps it up.
I think this is a key point that I think some people miss is to why do we keep evolving the language?
Why can't we be nice and stable like some of the languages?
At least that's how some people like to phrase it.
Why aren't we more of a Go or more of a Java where we evolve slower or make fewer changes?
Well, our flexibility in moving with the times has, I think, helped keep us relevant.
And that's
why we have this baked into the community of, no, we all evolve, we all grow, We'll continue to learn new things and language goes along with it.
Absolutely.
Gary,
I think Larry Wall has a quote.
Pearl is unreadable and ugly because people wanted it that way.
I call it a write-only language.
Yeah.
I'm there with you on that one.
So let's talk.
I got a phone.
Let's talk the Xenipython here because I think that that comes up a lot.
mentioned import this. And if you're in a REPL and you type import this, then you get the Xenopython by Tim Peters. We also have someone in the audience who's musically inclined and has done something pretty awesome with us.
So somebody
tell us
the story of
import this and the Xenopython, and then I'll play a little song, a song version of it for everyone that Barry did.
yeah there there are definitely uh blog posts i think quito did one and i did one about how this came to be i think we were looking i can't remember what year it was but we were looking for a motto or you know cat phrase for a pycon at one point or yeah i think it was a pycon and so we actually solicited input from community And I think we literally got 500 entries, 98% of which were just terrible.
But we had no way of choosing from that list.
And I remember Tim Peters.
So this had to be Python Labs time frame.
But Tim Peters said, okay, here's what we're going to do.
I'll split it in half, and then I'll go on to somebody else.
And then you split it in half and pass it on to somebody else.
And I think Tim and I were the only ones left that actually wanted to participate.
And we got down to the last couple.
And Import This had gotten pretty far down, but it wasn't one of the last choices.
And when we ended up with the last choice, we said, oh, that's really bad.
We're going with Import This.
So that's how the import this thing.
And then, of course, once we came up with that, we're like, oh, well, we've got to add this module.
What's the this module going to print?
You know, we actually
import
it.
And so we had to come up with the Xenopython.
But we had to obfuscate it just a little bit.
So it was rot13.
And I think we actually may have turned off subversion notifications.
And then because we wanted it to be an Easter egg.
So we committed it and didn't notify anybody and then turned it back on and just waited to see who would, you know, when somebody would find it.
So that was kind of the story of this.
That's incredible.
All right, Barry, can we play your song?
Drum roll, please.
Yeah, Barry, can we play your song?
Yeah, let's do it.
I love it.
Here we go.
Yeah, go for it.
Yeah, it's got a moment of silence at the beginning.
It's not like things frozen up.
It's just.
Beautiful is better than ugly Explicit is better than implicit Simple is better than complex Complex is better than complicated Flat is better than nested Sparse is better than dense Readability counts.
Special cases
aren't special enough to break the rules.
Although practicality beats purity.
Errors should never pass silently.
Unless explicitly silenced in the face of ambiguity.
Confuse the temptation to guess There should be one Preferably only one Obvious way
to do it Although that way Will not be obvious at first Unless you're Dutch Now is better than ever Although never is often better than
writing now If the implementation is hard to explain It's a bad idea If the implementation is easy to explain It may be a
good idea Namespaces are one Honking great idea Let's do more of those
Well done, man.
Very nice.
I love it.
That was awesome.
That's really good.
You
know, it reminds me of
the band Tribe, who played this song called Super Collider, about the Super Collider that's being built in Texas out in the 90s.
I love that song.
It
brings me to my heart.
I'll have to check that out.
Well, thank you.
Did
you do the vocals?
That was supposed to be done for...
So the idea...
Yeah, I did do the vocals.
They were good?
Yes, I did.
They
were good.
Well, thanks.
I did the whole thing in my little studio I have my liner notes up on my web page but you know we were supposed to very musically inclined Pythonistas and so the idea was we were going to produce a record like an actual vinyl for PyLadies and so we all kind of went off on our own and worked on stuff and I agreed to do it and had promptly forgotten about it until I think like 10 days before it was due.
So then, you know, scrambled and, you know, stole Tim's Zen of Python for the lyrics.
And of course, that was the year of the pandemic.
So there was no PyLadies.
And we were all so sad because I thought it was going to be a really cool.
I mean, everyone came up with some really great music for it.
So anyway.
That was good.
We'll put it out on the podcast.
How about that?
It'll get out there in the world one way or another.
Thank you.
We're getting short on time here.
We're coming up, honestly, if we all had the time and maybe some snacks and a beer or something or coffee, we could do
this for hours.
But we are getting in probably the time where we should wrap it up a bit.
I think we would be remiss if we didn't talk about Python 2 to 3.
What are you guys saying?
It was a tough story for a time, but I think it's in the past.
I think we're all good.
Everyone's rowing in the same direction.
But I think just as an important historical note in the evolution of Python, that was one of the bigger challenges it turned out to be.
Who wants to riff on this?
Well, you know, I think we actually, maybe we did it a little late, but like we couldn't do it
today.
There's just too much Python code out there today.
So in a sense, I think we did it at just the right time, as painful as it was and as long as it took.
I'm certainly super glad that we did because, you know, we got rid of a lot of warts and we really improved the implementation, the language.
But we had to do it.
And if we had done it any later, you know, I don't think Python would be what it is today.
It would be impossible to do it today.
So, yeah.
Mostly, I think, in hindsight, we can now say it was a success.
But...
You know, I was, especially on my other podcast, Python Bytes, I really tried to carry the water for it.
I referred to Python 2 as Legacy Python for years.
So much so, people gave me bad comments
about it.
I'm like, I don't care.
I'm still doing it.
They're like, don't make me feel bad about it working in.
I understand what you're saying, but let's all get together and let's just get this forward.
Go forward.
Come on.
Harry's words are also slightly colored as the release measure for Python 3.0.
So take everything you
just said.
Oh, yeah.
And 2.5, I think.
Or 2.6, I don't remember.
But we did them at the same time.
And then we told people, don't use Python 3.0.
We were like, I think that was the shortest length of time before the next release.
six
months for yeah
six months i feel worse for benjamin peterson because
he
showed up my gosh he you know he showed up on the scene and online he was like so smart and you know you know communicated really well and then he showed up at pycon in chicago i think he was 15 and his mom had to drive him to the to the
conference
and we gave him python 2 7 not knowing that he didn't have to do it for 10 years so uh but he did it great he was like he was absolutely a superstar for that
yeah um
i
think one of the interesting things of two to three is you know probably like 2012, I started seeing scientific Python and, you know, I was working on Django and scientific Python. And the more I started working with it, the harder it was because if you're trying to teach it to somebody, you had to do it. Well, if you use three, you do this.
And if you use two, you can do this. And Oh, by the way, if you're using windows with three or, And it became just
super complex
as an instructor.
And then I think it was around the latest part of 2014, the scientific Python community sort of put a stake in the ground and said, we are moving to Python 3 exclusively and kind of had a deprecation of we will no longer support 2.
And I think that,
I think, was a catalyst plus the growth of the whole scientific and data science ecosystem and notebooks and things like that kind of pushed us up.
But I know Brett, I think, was the one that made the tracker of how many Python packages still are.
Or the top
or something.
Was it you or was it somebody else?
It was somebody else.
I didn't do the website, but I wrote, can I use Python 3, the tool
you could use to do the calculation
that it used behind the scenes.
I didn't do the website.
Yeah.
But that
was super
helpful because, you know, you'd get up on talks and say, okay, we used to be here, and now we're almost got it completely green.
Yeah,
I mean, you know.
Sorry, I didn't mean to cut you off, Carl.
No, no, no.
Go ahead.
Yeah, I mean, I'll say I had a similar kind of educational rough spot with 2 to 3 as well because while I was doing my PhD at University of British Columbia, they were also looking at changing their intro language.
And they're considering Python, but it was during the transition.
So they didn't know, should we be
teaching Python 2, should we
be teaching Python 3?
Well, we don't want to teach the old stuff, but the new stuff's coming, but the new stuff was still a little too rough.
So they went to racket.
So we missed out on that one.
I agree with Barry. I think it was worth it, right?
I think switching to Unicode and all that was the right call.
I think that's definitely helped probably with our international reach and allowing people internationally to use the language in a better way and allowing people to use Unicode in their variable names, right? That's a Python 3 thing. You can just do that innately without having to declare the little coding cookie, which I'm willing to do. Most people don't know what is anymore because you don't care because it's all just UTF ain't now. If you're not laughing now, I can
tell
you're too young to know what the heck I'm talking about.
The other thing too is also we're also going to meet core devs who never used Python 2.
They don't know what the heck it is.
They're literally people
who are joining us
like, I've never written Python 2 in my life. I just know it's a thing. They hear stories and whispers in the back dark corners of conferences of what the transition was like. I don't know what you're talking about. I never used Python 2.
I jumped straight to 3 when I started and either they knew 2 existed but didn't worry about it before EOL'd or they didn't use Python until after Python 2 reached the end of its life in 2020 and they just don't know what the heck we're talking about.
So
it was rough.
For me, I have a different perspective.
Python 3000 started right at the moment that my company's project was killing itself in a 2 to 3 transition.
And so I hear about horror stories.
I'm like, you call that a horror story?
story.
Come on.
If you live in the uphill
both ways to school, it was below zero.
Right,
exactly.
I had to write
two different ways in the same code base.
Yeah.
I have
a container.
There's another thing that's kind of funny because I have a slide deck that I've given this talk a few times and it goes through like the python i think it starts at like 096 or 098 or something like that and i downloaded every tarball i could find couldn't build a single one on a modern system without changes uh but i dug out all the change logs and news files and things like that
and all
the announcements and you find such really super interesting nuggets in there like you know guido just changed operators you know the quality and comparison operator and just said, fix your code, you know, no backwards compatibility, no from, from future thing. Just like, you know, plus I, I've changed a bunch of other things. It's up to you to figure it out.
So like, you know, those are things that we could get away with, you know, way back then, or Guido could at least that, you know, you can't get away with that stuff today. You got to think about, you know, it's going to take five years for this to get through the community and there's backwards compatibility and we can't deprecate this thing. So.
Carol, on Barry's point about timing, is it safe to say that when IPython notebooks were really ramping up around 2016, 2017, that they were all Python 3 by then, that that whole audience?
Sort of.
I think the code base was, but I think the kernels, there was still a language kernel for two and a language kernel for three.
And I think it was shortly after that that we dropped the two
kernel.
There was a transition period, and I'm not quite sure on the dates now.
But, I
mean, that was where the benefit of JupyterHub and later Binder came in because we could kind of easily push out three to students and research institutions and not have to deal with two at all because they didn't need to set up their own environment.
Speaking of backwards compatibility, I'm a four-letter word for you all.
Cool.
Oh, that's painful.
For those of you who don't know
the story,
we'll edit keywords in a bug fix release.
2-2-1.
Yeah.
basically
Guido
went how hard can it be who's using true and false with capital letters as their constants anywhere it'll be fine and so in a bug fix release we made a keyword
and obviously
the world kind of blew up a bit
no
I was assigning true to one and false to zero and yeah
Michael's going to start flicking the I think it was made a keyword
in 2-3
it was two to three i think we were adding it to what was to become two to three and said i will just backboard it as uh symbols in in built-ins um
literally true
equals one and false equals zero and it was like man that'll be fine uh yeah that wasn't fine
but it was an important lesson.
We all learned an important lesson.
How to break
all the software
in the world.
I'm glad we're
on the other side though.
We all did learn lessons from the two to three transition that we will never repeat ever again.
Sure.
We'll do the big rewrite.
Oops.
Yeah, that's called free
threading, Michael.
Yes.
exactly we'll throw a did in at the same
time because we like challenges right just
keep us on our
toes we
were feeling too comfortable we could go on vacation you know stuff like that I
see
no
it's amazing
I think
the progress is really really good let's wrap it up here just so because otherwise we will make it hours and hours which I think would be fun but respect for all your time let's maybe just a final thought I'll let Paul go first this time.
How's that?
As this rollicking episode showed, episode one of 100 in the series, Python is full of great software, but it's also full of great stories and great people, different timelines and periods, and it's going to keep going on forever.
You be one of those stories.
If you're sitting out there listening, get involved.
It's the most joyful thing you could ever do to start participating.
And then after a few years, you find that you're someone like Carol, who's raising up the next group.
Get involved.
It'll be
the best thing you ever did.
Yeah, great advice.
You start nervous and feeling out of place.
And then all of a sudden, people are looking up to you.
Like, how'd that happen?
Yeah.
All right, Carol, I feel like that's a perfect pass over to you.
Yeah, it was like everything that was in my head just went out of my head.
So
thank you, Paul.
Good job, Paul.
Yeah, good job.
So I think the biggest thing that I would like to say is, you know, express my gratitude to Guido for having the inspiration to begin a language and everybody else who has participated in creating it, involving it, using it.
It's really, truly changed how people learn around the world and how they do research.
And that's incredibly rewarding to see.
And if I'm going to shill something for the next generation, there are people like Mariota and others that are really working hard on PyLadiesCon.
You know, I was fortunate enough to sponsor the first two and I will again the third.
But I highly encourage other people, sponsor, attend.
It really is fantastic content and really lets you see how it's being used globally.
And thank you, Michael, for having all of us.
Oh, yeah, you're very welcome.
It's my pleasure.
Barry.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
I would say, A, always have fun.
C, always be curious.
and if you follow your joy, you know, you will not go wrong.
You know, I'm, as Paul and Carol and, you know, all of us, I am, you know, so deeply grateful for being, having, you know, I've tripped into Python, you know, 30 years ago.
It gave me a life, a career.
It gave me unbelievable friends and community.
And to anybody thinking about getting involved in Python, not just using it, moving it forward, getting involved and contributing back, you can do it.
You don't have to be a C guru.
You don't have to know, you know, you can get into Python things.
You can get into the governance side.
You can get into the documentation side, the community side, There are so many avenues into the world of Python.
You can do it.
There
are
people who will help you and guide you, the wonderful people here.
So don't feel like it's something unattainable.
We're all just kind of like normal people who just kind of like add some fun.
So you can do it too.
I think one of the really inspirational and maybe unexpected things as you guys were touching on before is there's not a big company behind this.
It's just people who are doing something funky and different and loved it
and it's
taken over the world and how incredible is that?
Who would have seen that coming?
Before open source was obviously the thing of the day.
All right, Brett, final word.
Yeah, this is hard.
Jeez, I didn't want to go last after all those phrases because you all stole the ideas one by one.
Yeah, I mean, really, kind of what Barry just touched on, but I think everyone's touched on, is just the thanks to the community for making this what it is.
I mean, I know we all played our part, but so did a whole bunch of other people.
And all the millions of users of Python, which still blows my mind to say, even though I'm not off in that measurement.
They've all played their part in making the community what it is.
And I became a dad last year.
And I mean, all the parents will say it changes how you view things.
But for me, the way it's changed my view of Python is, A, I can say when my kid comes across Python, not if, and it won't be my doing, it'll be school, which still once again blows my mind.
But that if they were to come to me and say, A, I want to try participating in the Python community, I feel extremely luckily and privileged to be a part of a community where I could say, okay, and not have to think twice about it.
I don't think we all quite realize how lucky we are to have that in this world, especially the way things are today.
and
so thank
you to all of you for giving my kid a place hopefully I don't know maybe 10 years I don't know how long it takes for the kids to get into Python these days but for them to have a place to come and I can not have to watch over their shoulders about what they're dealing with online
in that
community so
thanks
to all of you and as I said that includes all the meetings not just the people on this call
yeah very well put thank you all for
sharing this story
Oh, well, you know what?
Let's make
you the last person for once.
Okay, okay, okay.
I see how this works.
No, I appreciate that.
Well, first of all, I can tell you that I've had a similar experience, Brett, with my kid, and that was not with the Python community, and it didn't go as well as you would think.
And
I don't care about
the story, but I haven't talked a lot about it.
I'm not going to go into it because we're out of time.
But that story connects with me, let's say that.
I'll close it out with this.
I don't know if it makes sense or if it's fair, but I do think it does, to imbue human characteristics into languages.
But I think Python is a compassionate language.
I think it welcomes beginners.
I think it doesn't try to scare you or its community is not full of people who try to impress you with how hard the thing they did is to understand.
right like yeah yeah that's a void star star but we're cast into this other thing at runtime you know what i mean like because it's templated like no no it welcomes people it's it's built to be welcoming but it doesn't stop once you get started right you can just keep growing into it and i think that's honestly the magic of it yeah
well i think
michael you deserve
credit for so many years stewarding so many different people, how they're using Python,
sharing them,
giving them a voice.
Because, you know, when I first came into Python, it was like, yeah, the language is really cool and gets out of my way. But it was this playground of thousands and thousands of packages that you could do anything. And I used to say, hey, folks at this community makerspace and five lines code or less you can do all these cool things and I think you're highlighting those cool things means a lot and contributes a lot to the health of the community
so for that thank
you very much Carol thank you everyone it's it's honestly an honor to do it it's cool well
with that let's say goodbye bye everyone thanks for
being here